---
section_number: Gadhadã I-27 
section_title: The Understanding by which God Eternally Resides within One
slug: vach/pratham-27
---
Before sunrise on Posh sudi 12, Samvat 1876 [28 December  1819], Shriji Mahãrãj arrived at the residential hall of theparamhansas in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. There, He sat on a platform facing west. He had tied a white fetoaround His head.  He had also covered Himself with a thick, white cotton cloth and was wearing a khes. At that time, an assembly ofparamhansas had gathered before Him.

After a few minutes of contemplation, Shriji Mahãrãj said,  “Everyone wishes to worship God, but their understanding differs.  But God fully resides in the heart of a person who possesses the following understanding: ‘The earth remains stable and trembles; the  stars remain steady in the sky; the rains fall; the sun rises and sets;  the moon appears and disappears, waxes and wanes; the vast oceans  remain constrained within their boundaries; a drop of liquid develops  into a human possessing hands, feet, a nose, ears and the rest of the  ten indriyas; the clouds, through which lightning strikes, float unsupported in the sky – these and a countless variety of other  wonders are due only to the form of God that I have attained.’ With  this understanding, he has the conviction that no one except the incarnate form of God is the cause of these wonders. He realises,  ‘The countless wonders which have occurred in the past, those which  are currently taking place, and those which will occur in the future  are all only due to the manifest form of God that I have attained.’

“Moreover, he also has the following understanding: ‘Even if someone were to throw dust on me, or were to humiliate me in any  way, or were to seat me on a donkey after cutting off my nose and  ears; or even if someone were to honour me by seating me on an  elephant – all these situations would be equal for me.’ Such a devotee  views a beautiful young woman, an unattractive woman and an old  woman with equality; he treats a heap of gold and a pile of stones  with equality; he also possesses countless noble virtues such as gnãn,  bhakti, vairãgya, etc. God eternally resides in the heart of such a  devotee.

“Consequently, by the grace of God, that devotee attains countless types of powers and liberates countless beings. Despite these powers, though, he tolerates the praises and insults of other  people. This itself is also a great feat, because to tolerate despite  being so powerful is not easy for others to achieve. Therefore, one  who tolerates in this manner should be considered to be extremely  great.

“The powers of such a person are such that since it is God who  sees through his eyes, he empowers the eyes of all of the beings in the  brahmãnd; and since it is God who walks through his legs, he is also  capable of endowing the strength to walk to the legs of all of the  beings in the brahmãnd. Thus, since it is God who resides in all of  the indriyas of such a Sant, that Sant is able to empower the indriyas of all beings in the brahmãnd. Therefore, such a Sant is  the sustainer of the world. His greatness lies in the fact that he  tolerates the insults delivered even by insignificant people. Only those who are forgiving in this manner should be considered to be  extremely great.

“On the other hand, those who threaten and frighten those meeker than themselves and believe, ‘I have become great,’ are not  truly great. In fact, those people in this world who frighten others by  showing yogic powers should not be considered to be devotees of God;  rather, they are beings lost in mãyã and suitable only for Yampuri.  Their greatness is limited to the worldly realm. For example, in  society, a person with one horse is considered to be greater than  someone with no horses at all; whereas a person with five horses is  considered to be greater than someone with only one horse. In this  way, the wealthier a person is, the greater he is considered to be in  society. However, such a person is not great in the spiritual realm.”

Continuing, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Householders and renunciants  who believe, ‘This woman is very beautiful; these clothes are extremely fashionable; this house is very nice; this gourd is very nice  and this utensil is very nice’ are all petty-minded. Then you may ask  whether such people will attain liberation or not. Well, in this  Satsang fellowship, even the wretched attain liberation. However,  the former persons never develop the virtues of a sãdhu, or the noble  virtues of the Sant previously described. Why? Because they have  not become suitable for such nobility.”

After delivering this discourse, Shriji Mahãrãj bid ‘Jai Sachchidãnand’ to all and returned to His residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr.

