---
section_number: Gadhadã I-18 
section_title: Denouncing the Vishays; A Haveli
slug: vach/pratham-18
---
Three hours before sunrise on Mãgshar vadi 6, Samvat 1876 [7  December 1819], Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a  large, decorated cot in the courtyard in front of the veranda outside  the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He  was dressed entirely in white clothes.

After summoning the paramhansas and satsangis, Shriji Mahãrãj sat engrossed in thought for quite some time. Then He said, “I wish to tell all of you something, so please listen.” He then said, “In My mind I feel that I should not talk about this matter, but  understanding all of you to be Mine, I shall tell you anyway. The  matter is such that only one who understands it and acts exactly  according to it will become a mukta. Otherwise, even by listening to,  or studying and understanding the meanings of the four Vedas, six  Shãstras, eighteen Purãns, and the Mahãbhãrat and other Itihãs  scriptures, one cannot become a mukta. I shall now talk about that  matter, so please listen.

“Regardless of the tempting objects which may appear before Me,  if there is no desire for them in My mind, I am not worried. Besides,  My nature is such that even if the slightest desire for an object arises  within, I feel at ease only after shunning it.

“For this reason, I thought about what actually causes disturbances within the hearts of God’s devotees. I considered the  man, buddhi, chitt and ahamkãr as possible causes. However, the  antahkaran is not the cause of these disturbances. The only fault of  the antahkaran is the complacency that it harbours – due to either  the power of its faith in God or the strength derived from knowledge  of the ãtmã. Due to this complacency, it feels, ‘I have found God, and  so I have nothing left to do.’

“Actually, the greater fault lies with the five gnãn-indriyas,  which I shall now elaborate in detail. Of the many varieties of foods  that a person eats, each has differing tastes and differing intrinsic  qualities. When he eats that food, the intrinsic qualities of the food pervade and affect the antahkaran as well as the entire body. For  example, if someone drinks bhang, then even if he is a devotee of God,  he loses awareness of his religious vows and the worship of God due  to the stimulation caused by that bhang. Similarly, the intrinsic  qualities of the countless types of food are, like bhang, of a countless  variety. So much so, that they seem endless.

“In the same way, a person also hears a countless variety of  sounds with his ears. Those sounds also have a countless variety of  intrinsic qualities. Consequently, the qualities of whatever sounds he  listens to pervade and affect his antahkaran. For example, there  may be an armed and violent person, an adulterous person, a prostitute, or a person who transgresses the rules of the Vedas and  society. Listening to the talks of such vicious persons is like drinking bhang or alcohol; i.e., such talks pollute the antahkaran of  the listener and make him forget the worship of God as well as his  religious vows.

“Similarly, there are countless varieties of touch sensations.  They too have countless varieties of intrinsic qualities. The touch of  a sinful person also has an effect like that of bhang and alcohol.  Therefore, even if a devotee were to touch such a person, that devotee  would lose all of his virtues.

“There are also countless varieties of things to see. They too  have countless varieties of intrinsic qualities. If one looks at an  immoral person, the effect is just as detrimental as drinking bhang or alcohol, i.e., looking at an immoral person certainly does pollute  one’s mind and cause harm.

“In the same way, there are countless varieties of smells, with  countless varieties of intrinsic qualities. If  one smells the fragrance  of a flower or some sandalwood paste from the hands of a sinful  person, it pollutes one’s mind in the same way as drinking bhang.

“Conversely, just as one’s mind is polluted by association with  the immoral, association with God or His Sant  purifies one’s mind.  Even if one’s mind is polluted, it is purified by listening to the words  of God and His Sant. The mind is similarly purified by their touch.  If, however, due to the constraints of one’s religious vows, one is  unable to touch such a great Sant, then merely touching the dust of  his feet to one’s head makes one pure. Likewise, one is purified by  the darshan of the great Sant; but of course one should do darshan while respecting one’s religious vows. One is also purified by eating  his prasãd. Here also, prasãd should be taken in accordance with  the niyams of one’s caste and ãshram as set by God. If one is unable  to take prasãd, one should offer sãkar and take that as prasãd. In  the same manner, smelling the fragrance of the flowers and sandalwood paste offered to the great Sant also purifies the mind.

“On the other hand, if one indulges in the panchvishays thoughtlessly, without distinguishing good from bad, then even if one  is as great as Nãrad and the Sanakãdik, one’s mind will surely  become polluted. What is so surprising, then, about the mind of one  who believes oneself to be the body becoming polluted? Therefore, if  one gives liberty to the five indriyas without applying the discrimination of what is suitable or unsuitable, one’s antahkaran will become polluted. On the other hand, if one indulges only in pure  vishays through the five indriyas, then one’s antahkaran becomes  pure. If the antahkaran becomes pure, one will be able to constantly  remember God.

“However, if the objects of indulgence of just one of the five indriyas is impure, the antahkaran will also become impure.  Therefore, the sole cause of any disturbance experienced by a devotee  of God during worship is the vishays of the five indriyas, not the  antahkaran.

“Another factor that determines the nature of a person’s  antahkaran is the type of company he keeps. If he sits in a gathering  of materialistic people in a lavish seven-storey haveli decorated with  beautiful mirrors and comfortable seats, and if those materialistic  people are seated wearing various types of jewellery and fine clothes,  and are exchanging alcohol amongst themselves, with prostitutes  performing vulgar dances to the accompaniment of various musical  instruments – then the person’s antahkaran will unquestionably be  adversely affected. On the other hand, if a person sits in an assembly  where a paramhansa is seated on a torn mattress in a grass hut and  discourses of God, dharma, gnãn, vairãgya and bhakti are in progress – then the person’s antahkaran will surely be favourably  affected.

“Therefore, if one thoughtfully examines the influence of good  company and evil company on the antahkaran, their effects can be  realised. A fool, however, cannot realise this. Indeed, this fact will  not be understood by those who behave irresponsibly like animals. In  comparison, one who has even a little wisdom and has sought at least  some refuge in God will immediately understand. Therefore, all  paramhansas, sãnkhya-yogis and karma-yogis should not associate  with evil people.

“Regardless of how evil a person may be before joining the Satsang fellowship, he should be accepted into Satsang after he takes  the appropriate vows. If after joining Satsang, however, that person  retains his evil nature, he should be removed from Satsang. If he or  she is not removed, then much harm will result. For example, if a  person’s finger is bitten by a snake, or if it develops gangrene, and if  the affected part is immediately removed, then the rest of the body  remains healthy. But if it is not removed, much harm results.  Similarly, if a person is recognised as evil, you should immediately  shun him.

“In conclusion, be wise enough to accept these words of Mine. If  you do so, I shall consider it to be equivalent to you having served Me  in every way. I will also bless all of you and be extremely pleased  with you. Why? Because thereby you will have justified My efforts.  Moreover, all of us will dwell together in the abode of God. However,  if you do not behave in this manner, we will be greatly distanced.  Consequently, you will be reborn as a ghost or a demon, and you will  have to suffer. Of course, the fruits of whatever bhakti you may have  previously offered to God will be rewarded eventually, but only after  much misery. Even then, you will become a mukta and go to the  abode of God only by behaving as I have described.

“Furthermore, if anyone attempts to imitate Me, he will definitely suffer. Why? Because Narnãrãyan resides within My  heart. Moreover, I am eternally liberated. I have not become a mukta through the preaching of others. I exercise complete control  over My man, buddhi, chitt and ahamkãr. In fact, I seize My  antahkaran just as a lion clutches a goat, whereas others cannot  even see their antahkaran. Therefore, imitating Me, believing that  one can remain pure even amidst alluring pleasures is just not  possible, even for the likes of Nãrad and the Sanakãdik. So what can  be said of others?

“Countless have become muktas and countless more will become  so. Amongst them, none have been able to indulge in pleasures of the  senses and yet remain uninfluenced by them; none will be able to do  so in the future; nor is there anyone like that presently. Even one  who has endeavoured for countless millions of years is incapable of  remaining uninfluenced amidst temptations. Therefore, if you behave as I have described, you will benefit.”

Continuing, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “When I lovingly call someone  near, it is for the benefit of their jiva. When I look at someone affectionately, or eat the tasty meals they have prepared, or sit on a  decorated cot arranged by them, or accept from them clothes, ornaments, garlands of flowers and other offerings – it is all for the  good of their jiva, but not for the sake of My personal enjoyment. In  fact, I swear by the name of Rãmãnand Swãmi that I do not accept  those objects for My personal pleasure. Therefore, realising this,  none of you should imitate Me.  “Also, keep the activities of your five indriyas extremely pure. Please  accept this command of Mine without fail. This fact is simple in that  it is comprehensible to all; so all of you will immediately understand  it. Moreover, if you extensively propagate it throughout Satsang, I  shall be very pleased indeed.”

Having delivered this discourse, Shriji Mahãrãj bid ‘Jai Sachchidãnand’ to all and returned to His residence.

