---
section_number: Gadhadã I-14 
section_title: “Ante Yã Matihi Sã Gatihi”
slug: vach/pratham-14
---
On Mãgshar vadi 2, Samvat 1876 [2 December 1819], Swãmi  Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting facing south on a large,  decorated cot under the neem tree in front of the mandir of Shri  Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He had tied  a white pãgh around His head. He was also wearing a white khes  and had covered Himself with a white cotton cloth. Also, tassels of  yellow flowers decorated His pãgh. Bunches of yellow flowers had  been placed above both of His ears, with roses decorating those bunches. Garlands of yellow flowers adorned His neck as well. With  His right hand, He was playing with a white sevanti flower. At that  time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places  had gathered before Him.

Shriji Mahãrãj then asked the munis, “Suppose there are two  devotees of God. One has renounced worldly life, and although he  does not have intense vairãgya, he does physically observe the religious vows thoroughly. Nevertheless, he still harbours a slight  desire for worldly life in his mind, but he overcomes this by a thought  process. He also has firm faith in God. Such is the renunciant. On  the other hand, there is another devotee, a householder, who also has  firm faith in God. Even though he has remained a householder by  God’s command, he is disinterested in worldly life. He has the same  intensity of worldly desires as the renunciant. Of these two devotees  of God, who is better?”

Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “The renunciant devotee is better.”

Shriji Mahãrãj countered, “The renunciant has renounced of his  own accord, out of frustration; so how can he be better? The  householder, on the other hand, has stayed at home because of God’s  command; so how can he be inferior?”

Muktãnand Swãmi attempted to answer Shriji Mahãrãj’s  question in many ways but was unable to do so satisfactorily. Thus,  he said, “Mahãrãj, please answer the question Yourself.”

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “If a renunciant who is weak minded receives rich foods to eat, then desires for worldly life will be  revived within his heart. Or, if he encounters many hardships,  again, desires for worldly life will be revived. Compared to such a  renunciant, a householder is much better, because whenever a householder encounters times of extreme hardship or even times of  great pleasure, he is always cautious lest he becomes attached to these pleasures. With this awareness, he remains disinterested in  worldly life. Therefore, a true renunciant is one who has no desires  for worldly life having once renounced it.

“Keep in mind, though, that a householder is much better than a  renunciant with worldly desires, provided he observes the dharma prescribed for householders. The householders’ dharma, however, is  extremely difficult to observe, because countless occasions of good and  bad times are encountered. Despite this, a true householder’s mind  does not waver from serving the Sant or from observing his dharma.  He also realises, ‘The profound association of the Sant that I have  attained is like a magnificent chintãmani and a kalpavruksh. My  wealth, property, sons and daughters are all merely like a dream,  whereas the profound association of the Sant that I have attained is  the only true benefit of life.’ Moreover, he remains undeterred amidst  any type of adversity that may come his way. Such a householder is  by far the better of the two. Therefore, of all things, becoming a  devotee of God is very difficult. Moreover, to attain the association of  the Bhakta of God is very rare, indeed.”

Having spoken in this way, Shriji Mahãrãj then arranged for  the singing of devotional songs written by Muktãnand Swãmi  describing the glory of God and His Sant.

Thereafter Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “The Shrutis state, ‘•ãÃ  ÿÊ ◊ÁÃ— ‚Ê ªÁÃ—–’i. They claim that if one’s mind is  fixed on God at  the time of death, one will attain a favourable fate after death; otherwise, one will not. This seems to be the interpretation of that  Vedic verse. If this is so, what is the significance of the bhakti one  has performed throughout one’s life?”

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “A person who has been graced with  the attainment of the manifest form of God never falls from the path  of liberation, regardless of whether he remembers God at the time of  death. God invariably protects him.

“Conversely, a person who has turned away from God does not  attain liberation even if he dies normally, while being conscious.  Instead, he is consigned to Yampuri after death. Many sinful butchers die while still fully conscious. But if a devotee of God suffers  an untimely death, does that mean he will not attain liberation?  Moreover, will that sinner attain liberation? Certainly not.  Therefore, that Vedic verse should be interpreted as follows: ‘The outcome at the time of death is determined by the present state of the  mind.’ Thus, a devotee who realises in his mind, ‘My liberation is  guaranteed,’ will, as a result, certainly attain liberation after death.  In comparison, a person who has not been graced with the attainment of the Sant or the form of God will feel in his mind, ‘I am  ignorant, and I will not attain liberation.’ As a result, his state of  mind will determine his fate after death.

“Furthermore, a person who is a servant of God has nothing left  to do. In fact, other jivas attain liberation by his darshan, so what is one’s jiva after one’s death. Hiranyakeshiyashãkhã Shruti surprising about he himself attaining liberation? But to cultivate servitude towards God is very difficult indeed. Why? Because a servant of God has the following characteristics: He realises the physical body is asatya, and his own ãtmã is satya. He harbours no desires to indulge in the objects that are intended for his Master.  Also, he never behaves contrary to the wishes of his Master. Such a person is called a true servant of God; whereas a servant of God who behaves as the body is a pseudo-devotee.”

