---
section_number: Gadhadã I-21 
section_title: One Possessing Ekãntik Dharma; The Two Forms of Akshar
slug: vach/pratham-21
---
On the evening of Posh sudi 3, Samvat 1876 [19 December  1819], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting facing east on a large,decorated cot on the veranda outside the east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was wearing ablack-bordered khes and had covered Himself with a thick, white cotton cloth. He had also tied a white pãgh around Hishead. At that time, some sãdhus were singing devotional songs to the accompaniment of a jhãnjh and pakhwãj. Many othersãdhus as well as satsangis from various places had assembled before Him.

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj quietened the assembly and said,  “Please listen; I wish to tell you something.” Having said this, He  sat in contemplation with His eyes closed for quite some time.

Thereafter, He began, “A devotee who in his mind desires to intensely please God can do so by the following means: unshakeable  resolve in observing the dharma of one’s caste and ãshram; intensely  firm ãtmã-realisation; dislike for all objects except God; and bhakti which is devoid of all desires for fruits, and which is accompanied  with an understanding of God’s greatness. It is through these four  spiritual endeavours that God can be extremely pleased. They are  collectively known as ekãntik dharma. At present, there are many  devotees possessing such ekãntik dharma in our Satsang fellowship.

“In addition, a devotee of God should contemplate on the form of  God while eating, drinking, bathing, washing, walking and sitting – in fact, during all activities. He should particularly contemplate on  God and continuously behold His form when there is no mental  disturbance within. However, when there is some internal disturbance due to fluctuating thoughts, he should realise his own  self to be distinct from the body, the indriyas, the antahkaran, their  presiding deities and the vishays. Only when those disturbing thoughts subside should he contemplate on the form of God.

“Furthermore, this body should not be believed to be one’s true  self. Nor should one’s bodily relations be regarded as one’s true relations. This is because the jiva has previously taken birth in each  of the 8.4 million life forms3. In fact, the jiva has taken birth in the  wombs of all females in this world; it has also taken birth numerous  times in the wombs of all of the dogs, cats, monkeys and other types  of life forms in the cycle of 8.4 million life forms. Moreover, of all the  different types of females in this world, which has it not previously  made its wife? All have been its wife at one time or another.  Similarly, assuming numerous female bodies, that jiva has also made  all of the different forms of males its husband. Hence, just as one  does not believe the relations of those previous 8.4 million life forms  to be one’s true relations, and just as one does not believe the bodies  of those 8.4 million life forms to be one’s true body, similarly, one  should not believe this present body to be one’s true self, nor should  one believe the relations of this body to be one’s true relations. Why?  Because just as no relationship remains with bodies from the previous 8.4 million life forms, similarly the relationship with this  body will not remain either. Therefore, having realised the body, all  possessions and all objects to be asatya; and having realised one’s  own self to be distinct from the body, indriyas and antahkaran; and  while observing one’s own dharma, one should offer bhakti to God  which is devoid of all desires for its fruits. Moreover, in order to  increasingly understand the profound greatness of God day by day,  one should also constantly keep the company of a sãdhu.

“A person who does not have this understanding, who identifies  his self with the body, and who has a mundane attitude should be  thought of as an animal – even if he is presently in the Satsang  fellowship. Yet, in this Satsang, even animals attain liberation by  the profound grace of God. What is so surprising, then, about humans attaining liberation? However, such a person cannot be called a true ekãntik bhakta of God. Only one possessing the understanding previously described can be called an ekãntik bhakta.  After such an ekãntik bhakta leaves his body and becomes free of all  influences of mãyã, he attains Akshardhãm via the archimãrg.”

Continuing, Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “That Akshar has two forms. One, which is formless and pure chaitanya, is known as  Chidãkãsh or Brahmamahol. In its other form, that Akshar remains  in the service of Purushottam Nãrãyan. A devotee who has reached  Akshardhãm attains qualities similar to those of Akshar and forever  remains in the service of God. Furthermore, Shri Krishna Purushottam Nãrãyan is forever seated in that Akshardhãm. The  countless millions of muktas, who have attained qualities similar to  those of Akshar, reside in that Akshardhãm, and all of them behave  as servants of Purushottam. Purushottam Nãrãyan Himself is the  master of them all and the Lord of the lords of countless millions of  brahmãnds.

“Keeping this in mind, all of our satsangis should develop the  following singular conviction: ‘We also wish to join the ranks of the  aksharrup muktas and go to Akshardhãm to forever remain in the  service of God. We have no desire for the temporary and vain worldly  pleasures; nor do we wish to be tempted by them in any way.’ Keeping such a firm conviction, one should offer ekãntik bhakti to  God.

“Furthermore, by thoroughly understanding the profound greatness of God, one should, in this very life, eradicate  one’s desires  for women, wealth and all objects other than God. Otherwise, if  desires for objects other than God do remain, then after one dies, if  one encounters enticements along the path to the abode of God, one  will forsake God and be lured by those enticements instead. This  would prove to be a major obstruction. Therefore, one should worship  God after overcoming desires for all objects.”

