---
section_number: Gadhadã I-24 
section_title: The Elevated Spiritual State of Gnãn; ‘Sourness’ in  the Form of the Understanding of God’s Greatness
slug: vach/pratham-24
---
On the evening of Posh sudi 6, Samvat 1876 [22 December  1819], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the  veranda outside the east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã. He had tied a white feto around His head and was wearing  a white khes. Also, He had donned a warm, red dagli and had  covered Himself with a thick, white cotton cloth. At that time,  paramhansas as well as devotees from various places had gathered  before Him.

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said to the paramhansas, “I shall  explain how an elevated spiritual state can be attained by gnãn.  What is that gnãn like? Well, it transcends Prakruti-Purush. When  an elevated spiritual state is attained by this gnãn, Prakruti-Purush  and the entities evolved from them do not come into view. This is  known as gnãn-pralay. One who has attained such an elevated spiritual state sees only pure chaitanya – within which only the form  of God resides, with no other forms remaining. At times, one cannot  see even the form of God within that divine light; only the light is  seen. At other times, however, both the divine light and the form of  God are seen. This is known as the elevated spiritual state attained  by gnãn. Such an elevated spiritual state is attained by constantly  maintaining one’s vrutti on the form of the incarnate God visible at  present.”

Continuing, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “The extent to which one has  understood the greatness of God determines the intensity of both the  divine light experienced in the heart and the divine sound of pranav that is heard. Furthermore, the extent of one’s faith and understanding of the greatness of God determines the extent to which  vicious thoughts are curbed. Thus, when one develops absolute faith  in God and thoroughly understands His greatness, all of one’s vicious  thoughts are eliminated.

“For example, if a person has sucked a slice of lemon, his teeth  become a little sensitive, but he is still able to chew soft chanã.  However, if he has sucked a whole lemon, he is unable to chew even  chanã; in fact, he chews even a mung bean with much difficulty. If,  however, he has sucked many lemons, he would be unable to chew even cooked rice. In the same manner, when one has developed ‘sourness’ in the form of faith in God and an understanding of His  greatness, one’s gums – in the form of the four antahkarans and ten  indriyas – become sensitised. In that state, the jiva is unable to  chew chanã in the form of thoughts for the vishays with its gums in  the form of the man. With its gums in the form of the chitt, the jiva becomes incapable of contemplating on the vishays. With its gums in  the form of the buddhi, the jiva becomes incapable of developing a  resolve for the vishays. With its gums in the form of the ahamkãr, the jiva becomes incapable of developing any form of consciousness  related to the vishays. Similarly, the jiva, with its gums in the form  of the five gnãn-indriyas and five karma-indriyas, becomes incapable  of chewing chanã in the form of the vishays of the respective indriyas.

“Conversely, the indriyas and the antahkaran of a person who  does not have absolute faith in God and who has not fully realised the greatness of God do not withdraw completely from their respective  vishays.”

Shriji Mahãrãj then explained, “The form of God transcends  mãyã and its gunas, and is free of all types of flaws, but it is for the  sake of the liberation of jivas that He appears to be like a human. In  fact, God is devoid of each of the flaws that senseless people attribute  to Him. However, the intellect of the person attributing such flaws  will never be freed of those flaws that he attributes to God.  Specifically, a person who believes God to be full of lust will himself  become intensely full of lust; a person who believes God to be full of  anger will himself become intensely full of anger; a person who believes God to be full of avarice will himself become intensely full of  avarice; and a person who believes God to be full of jealousy will  himself become intensely full of jealousy; etc. In fact, whatever types  of flaws a person attributes to God will ultimately cause misery to the  person himself – just as a fistful of sand thrown at the sun falls back  into the thrower’s eyes. On the other hand, if a person realises God  to be absolutely flawless, then regardless of his own swabhãvs, he  himself becomes absolutely flawless as well.”

Thereafter, Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “Suppose there is a person whose indriyas are not drawn towards any of the vishays; nor  do vicious thoughts arise in his antahkaran. He also has absolute  faith in God. Despite this, though, a feeling of unfulfillment remains,  and he feels despondent within. What can be the reason for this?”

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “That is also a major deficiency in the  devotee; i.e., despite the fact that his mind has become stable and  despite the fact that he has intensely firm faith in God, he still fails  to experience profound happiness in his heart. Specifically, he does  not feel, ‘I am extremely fortunate and completely fulfilled, whereas  others in the world are constantly being troubled by lust, anger,  avarice, infatuation, arrogance, matsar, desires and cravings. They  are subject to the three types of sufferingsi day and night. As for me,  the incarnate form of Purushottam has compassionately revealed His  own form to me. He has also freed me from lust, anger and all of the  other vicious natures. He has also placed me in the company of sãdhus similar to Nãrad and the Sanakãdik. Indeed, I am very  fortunate.’ Failing to think in this manner, and failing to remain  extremely elated throughout the day is a major deficiency. In fact,  such a devotee is like a child who has been given a chintãmani in its  hand, yet derives no happiness from it because it does not realise the  chintãmani’s value. Similarly, the major drawback of that devotee is  that despite having attained Purushottam Bhagwãn, he does not feel  constant elation within by realising, ‘I am completely fulfilled.’

“Moreover, when a fault is noticed in a devotee, one should think, ‘His swabhãv is such that it is not suitable in  the Satsang  fellowship; nevertheless, he has attained satsang. Regardless of what  he is like, he has still remained in the Satsang fellowship. Surely,  then, his sanskãrs from past lives or from this very life must be  extremely favourable for him to have attained this satsang.’ With  or animals), adhyãtma (those caused by one’s own mind)this understanding, one should highly appreciate even such a person’s virtues.”

After this discourse, Shriji Mahãrãj bid ‘Jai Sachchidãnand’ to everyone and returned to His residence.

